---
title: GitLab Security Logging Standards
controlled_document: true
---

## Purpose

This security logging standard defines the requirements for security log generation, management, storage, access and use.

## Scope

The Security Loggings Standard is applicable to all owners of systems utilized across GitLab which are tracked within the Tech Stack to ensure that all systems are vetted completely and accurately using a consistent and standardized methodology.

## Roles & Responsibilities

| Role | Responsibility |
|------|----------------|
| GitLab System Owners | Directly Responsible for adhering to the requirements outlined in this standard |
| Security Operations Team | Directly Responsible for the prioritization, onboarding and maintenance of logs in the Security team's SIEM (Security Information Event Management) system, Devo. |

## Security Logs: Definition & SSOT

### What are security logs

Security logs are generated by applications and systems used on GitLab and are primarily used for security monitoring, incident response and threat hunting.

For example, the following logs are security logs

- Audit Logs for each system (logs that record logins, changes, etc.)
- Network logs
- Detection logs from security products (e.g., EDR)
- GitLab access logs, API logs, and other logs needed to monitor GitLab SaaS

### SSOT

SecOps maintains a list of security logs and priorities and details in [Security Logging SSOT](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/13xqVnfNP8h0MzxHz5Yb5MHXpDZGaJSlj_XGczOLkLG4/edit#gid=0) (Internal Only).

## Onboarding Security Logs to Devo

1. Confirm this Security Logging Standard procedure has been followed
2. Create [an issue in the Security Logging Project using the add-remove-change-log-source template](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-com/gl-security/engineering-and-research/security-logging/security-logging/-/issues/new?issuable_template=add-remove-change-log-source), and the Security Logging team will be in contact to assist with log onboarding to Devo.

## Security Logging Outside of Devo

### Log Collection Requirements

The security team at GitLab may require systems not logging to Devo to collect security logs locally. Generally, the retention of the security audit log is the baseline for local logging requirements.

For Tier 1 and Tier 2 applications in Critical System Tiering, log retention periods are defined by log source, outlined in [the policy](https://handbook.gitlab.com/handbook/security/records-retention-deletion/). For applications that do not meet these requirements, 90 days retention is considered best practice.


#### Basic Security Logs: Necessary Fields

When collecting logs locally, at a minimum, basic fields as outlined below are recommended for collection.

| Column | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| **Timestamp** | Timestamp of the action(UTC). |
| **ID/Email Address** | ID of the user. |
| **User Name** | Name of the user. |
| **Event Name** | Event Name or API endpoint path of the action. |
| **Action** | Description of the action performed |
| **Status code** | Whether the operation was successful or not |
| **IP Address** | IP address of the user who performed the action. |
| **User Agent** | User Agent of the user who performed the action. |
